In this lecture, we look at the
boot process in a simplified manner
by dividing it into four broader steps.
The boot process can be
broken down into four stages;
one, BIOS POST, two,
boot loader or the GRUB2,
three, kernel initialization,
four, and finally,
the service initialization using systemd.
Before we dive into each of these steps,
a quick note on how to initiate
a Linux boot process.
This can be achieved in one of two ways.
The first method is to start a Linux device,
which is in a halted or stopped state.
Second, reboot or reset a running system.
The first step called BIOS POST
has very little to do with Linux itself.
POST stands for power-on self-test.
In this stage, BIOS runs a POST test
to ensure that the hardware components
attached to the device
are functioning correctly.
If POST fails, the computer
may not be operable
and the system will not proceed to
the second stage of the boot process.
The next stage after POST is the boot loader.
After a successful POST test,
the BIOS loads and executes the
boot code from the boot device,
which is located in the first sector
of the hard disk.
In Linux, this is located in
the /Boot File System.
The boot loader provides the
user with the boot screen
often with multiple options to boot into
such as Microsoft Windows OS
or an Ubuntu 18.04 OS,
in an example of a dual boot system.
Once the selection is made at the boot screen,
the boot loader loads the kernel into memory,
supplies it with some perimeters,
and hands over the control to the kernel.
A popular example of the boot loader
is the GRUB2,
which stands for Grand Unified
Bootloader version 2,
and it is now the primary boot loader
for most current Linux distributions.
After the selected kernel is loaded into
the memory, it is usually decompressed.
This is done as the kernels are generally in
a compressed state to conserve space.
The kernel is then loaded into
the memory and starts executing.
During this space, the kernel
carries out tasks
such as initializing hardware and memory
management tasks among other things.
Once it is completely operational,
the kernel looks for an init process to run,
which sets up the user space and the processes
needed for the user environment.
In most of the current day Linux distributions,
the init function then calls
the systemd daemon.
The systemd is responsible for bringing
the Linux host to a usable state.
Systemd is responsible for
mounting file systems,
starting and managing system services.
Systemd is the universal standard these days
but not too long ago another initialization
process called System V init was used.
It is also called SysV.
For example, these were used in RHEL 6
or CentOS 6 distributions.
One of the key advantages of
using systemd over SYS file init
is that it reduces system startup time
by parallelizing the startup of services.
To check the init system used,
run an ls -l command against the file /sbin/init.
If it's a systemd managed system,
you will see a pointer to /lib/systemd/systemd.